synge-eval - a scripting interface for synge(1)
===============================================

The following document is the user documentation for **Synge Eval**, a scripting interface to **synge**(1).
For general documentation about Synge itself, consult **synge**(1).
This document is written from an end-user perspective, explaining how to use **Synge Eval** (with little care for the actual inner workings).
Developers (or geeks in general) should consult **synge-eval**(3).

## OVERVIEW ##

The **Synge Eval** interface is not for general use.
It is a non-interactive interface, designed for use in scripts and other non-interactive backend and testing uses.
Only the minimum useful functionality is implemented by **Synge Eval**.
**Synge Eval** should not be used for everyday use, as usually new features to **Synge** aren't implemented unless they have a scripting purpose.

## SYNOPSIS ##

**synge-eval** [<-mRVh>] <expression>[_s_]

## OPTIONS ##

    -m [mode], --mode [mode]	Sets angle mode to [mode]
    -R, --no-random				Make random functions predictable
    -S, --no-skip				Print ignorable errors
    -V, --version				Print version information
    -h, --help					Print help page

## SPECIFICS ##

The expressions are evaluated in the order supplied to **Synge Eval**.
All expressions are evaluated, and errors do not halt the program's execution.
Any inputs that look like options (e.g. `-m`) will be treated as options, not expressions.

## DEFAULTS ##

**Synge Eval** does not modify any of the defaults described in **synge**(1), except when specified in a command-line argument.

## COPYRIGHT ##

**Synge Eval** (and the associated documentation) is Copyright (C) 2013 Cyphar, and is licensed under the MIT/X11 License.

## SEE ALSO ##

**synge**(1), **synge-gtk**(1), **synge-eval**(1)
