synge-cli - a command-line interface to synge(1)
================================================

The following document is the user documentation for **Synge CLI**, a simple command line user interface to **synge**(1).
For general documentation about Synge itself, consult **synge**(1).
This document is written from an end-user perspective, explaining how to use **Synge CLI** (with little care for the actual inner workings).
Developers (or geeks in general) should consult **synge-cli**(3).

## SYNOPSIS ##

**synge-cli** <ignored arguments>

## OVERVIEW ##

The **Synge CLI** interface is the most basic interface to Synge, designed to give maximum control to the user.
The interface is in the form of a `read-eval-print` loop, which will take one line of input, evaluate it and then print the result of the computation.

## STATE ##

Synge CLI allows you to very simply list information about the current state of **Synge**, as well as the list of available builtins.

    Argument (:list [argument])		Description
    functions						Print a list of builtin functions and descriptions
    constants						Print a list of builtin constants and descriptions
    variables						Print a list of variables and their values
    expressions						Print a list of expressions and their values

## META ##

**Synge CLI** can give you information about itself, by running the following commands:

    Command			Description
    : version		Print version information
    : license		Print license and copyright information
    : warranty		Print warranty information

## SETTINGS ##

**Synge CLI** supports all of the settings Synge provides, and can retrieve current settings.
The following is a table of the templates of both commands, where `[setting]` is the name of the setting (as described in **synge**(1)) and `[value]` is the new value of the setting (as described in **synge**(1)).

    Template					Description
    : get [setting]				Print the value of a setting
    : set [setting] [value]		Set the value of a setting. Nonsensical settings will be ignored.

## DEFAULTS ##

The following is a list of the default settings set each time **Synge CLI** starts.

    Settings		Default Value
    mode			degrees
    error			traceback
    strictness		strict
    precision		dynamic

## SEE ALSO ##
**synge**(1), **synge-gtk**(1), **synge-eval**(1)
